docs(TLS&TCP): update examples to reflect new port configuration and incl… (#8598)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/_src/kubernetes-ingress-controller/guides/services/tls.md

Reviewer: Following this guide, from https://deploy-preview-8598--kongdocs.netlify.app/kubernetes-ingress-controller/latest/guides/services/tls/#tls-termination, I'm getting the following status on the `Gateway` (and not traffic being routed):

```
status:
  addresses:
  - type: IPAddress
    value: 172.18.0.101
  - type: IPAddress
    value: 172.18.0.101
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2025-04-08T16:25:04Z"
    message: this unmanaged gateway has been picked up by the controller and will
      be processed
    observedGeneration: 1
    reason: Accepted
    status: "True"
    type: Accepted
  - lastTransitionTime: "2025-04-08T16:25:04Z"
    message: ""
    observedGeneration: 1
    reason: Programmed
    status: "True"
    type: Programmed
  listeners:
  - attachedRoutes: 1
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2025-04-08T16:25:04Z"
      message: no Kong listen with the requested protocol is configured
      observedGeneration: 1
      reason: UnsupportedProtocol
      status: "False"
      type: Accepted
    - lastTransitionTime: "2025-04-08T16:25:04Z"
      message: ""
      observedGeneration: 1
      reason: Invalid
      status: "False"
      type: Programmed
    - lastTransitionTime: "2025-04-08T16:25:04Z"
      message: ""
      observedGeneration: 1
      reason: InvalidCertificateRef
      status: "False"
      type: ResolvedRefs
    name: https
    supportedKinds:
    - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
      kind: HTTPRoute
    - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
      kind: GRPCRoute
```

The default installation using the `ingress` chart seems to yield http and tls ports (with the following default `KONG_PROXY_LISTEN`: `0.0.0.0:8000, [::]:8000, 0.0.0.0:8443 http2 ssl, [::]:8443 http2 ssl`). When Gateway ports are reconciled in https://github.com/Kong/kubernetes-ingress-controller/blob/2c43b76ff7e764a043f623d84ffc5f0683d99288/internal/controllers/gateway/gateway_utils.go#L364 the Gateway listener protocol is set to HTTPS in the examples from this doc and hence it does not match and yields `no Kong listen with the requested protocol is configured`.

I think we may want to fix that. One way to do this would be to change the `Gateway` listener protocol to `TLS` but that would change how the hostname matching works (https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/blob/a8fe5c8732a37ef471d86afaf570ff8ad0ef0221/apis/v1/gateway_types.go#L256-L264). Another way to fix this is to revisit the protocol and listener matching in KIC (but that requires a release to make this work).

Using the stream listen with `kong` chart also doesn't seem to do the trick 

```
proxy:
  stream:
    - containerPort: 8900
      servicePort: 8900
      protocol: TCP
      parameters:
      - ssl
      - reuseport
```

because that fails to match kong protocol to listener protocol in [the same place](https://github.com/Kong/kubernetes-ingress-controller/blob/2c43b76ff7e764a043f623d84ffc5f0683d99288/internal/controllers/gateway/gateway_utils.go#L363-L364).

All in all I'd say we handle this and fix the guide.

Reviewer 2: @pmalek This should be fixed by using port 443 in the listener. The [determineListenersFromDataPlane](https://github.com/Kong/kubernetes-ingress-controller/blob/b6b1ff06a38b0289d5e9784c0a5891da63f1667a/internal/controllers/gateway/gateway_controller.go#L796) filters the listeners which satisfies:
- The port number is in the ports of proxy service
- The target port is listened by Kong gateways proxy
- The listening protocol on Kong gateway supports the protocols of the listener
So setting the port of the listener to `443` should fix.
I tried with the port 443 and see the traffic is forwarded.

Reviewer: I've tried to follow the TLS guide now (via https://deploy-preview-8598--kongdocs.netlify.app/kubernetes-ingress-controller/latest/guides/services/tls/) and the termination guide works for me but TLS passthrough does not. The `Gateway` still has the status: 

```
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  annotations:
    konghq.com/publish-service: kong/kong-gateway-proxy
  name: example-gateway-passthrough
  namespace: kong
spec:
  gatewayClassName: kong
  listeners:
  - allowedRoutes:
      namespaces:
        from: Same
    hostname: demo.example.com
    name: https
    port: 8899
    protocol: TLS
    tls:
      mode: Passthrough
status:
  addresses:
  - type: IPAddress
    value: 172.18.0.100
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2025-04-22T11:38:15Z"
    message: this unmanaged gateway has been picked up by the controller and will
      be processed
    observedGeneration: 3
    reason: Accepted
    status: "True"
    type: Accepted
  - lastTransitionTime: "2025-04-22T11:38:15Z"
    message: ""
    observedGeneration: 3
    reason: Programmed
    status: "True"
    type: Programmed
  listeners:
  - attachedRoutes: 0
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2025-04-22T11:38:15Z"
      message: no Kong listen with the requested protocol is configured
      observedGeneration: 3
      reason: UnsupportedProtocol
      status: "False"
      type: Accepted
    - lastTransitionTime: "2025-04-22T11:38:15Z"
      message: ""
      observedGeneration: 3
      reason: Invalid
      status: "False"
      type: Programmed
    name: https
    supportedKinds:
    - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
      kind: TLSRoute
```

I've tried changing the listener port to 443 and that didn't help.

> I tried with the port 443 and see the traffic is forwarded.

Can you be more precise what have you changed @randmonkey? If the guide need a change to work I believe this should be applied in this PR.

Reviewer 2: This requires configuring `stream_listen` for Kong gateways and enable `TLSRoute` on KIC by feature gates. I'll add the instructions to make it work.

Reviewer 2: Added the instructions in the PR.

## Examples

{% include /md/kic/prerequisites.md release=page.release disable_gateway_api=false gateway_api_experimental=true %}

### TLS Termination
{% assign gwapi_version = "v1" %}
{% if_version lte:2.12.x %}
{% assign gwapi_version = "v1beta1" %}
{% endif_version %}

You can create a `Deployment` running the go-echo server and a `Service` pointing to the pods, then use the `Service` as the backend:

  ```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: example-echo-server
  labels:
    app: echo
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: echo
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: echo
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: echo
        image: kong/go-echo:0.5.0
        env:
          - name: POD_NAME
            valueFrom:
              fieldRef:
                fieldPath: metadata.name
        ports:
          - containerPort: 1027
            name: "echo-http"
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  labels:
    app: echo
  name: echo
spec:
  ports:
  - port: 1027
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 1027
  selector:
    app: echo
  type: ClusterIP

  ```

> For TLS termination, you need to configure a `Secret` for listener certificate on the `Gateway`. or for the certificate on `spec.tls` of the `Ingress`. This certificate will be used in setting up TLS connection between your client and {{site.base_gateway}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For TLS termination, you need to configure a `Secret` for listener certificate on the `Gateway` or for the certificate on `spec.tls` of the `Ingress`. This certificate will be used in setting up TLS connection between your client and {{site.base_gateway}}.
```

1. Create a `Gateway` resource.

    ```yaml

>     apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/{{ gwapi_version }}

Reviewer: Why are we changing this to a hardcoded value? Was the version incorrect previously? ( I don't think so but in case that was the case can't we tweak the conditions above to set the correct `gwapi_version`?)

Author: This is my mistake; I forgot that this document can switch between different KIC versions. It has been corrected. Thank you!

    spec:
     ingressClassName: kong
     tls:

>      - secretName: demo-example-com-cert

Reviewer: I don't see us defining an example `Secret` with a cert that can be used in this guide. WDYT about adding it so that this guide can be following step by step (include the certificate creation)?

             service:
               name: echo
               port:

>                  number: 1027

Reviewer: Can we make this `echo` deployment also part of the guide? Currently the guide expects users to have it defined in the cluster but doesn't instruct how to deploy it.

Reviewer 2: Added it in the guide.

              name: demo-example-com-cert
    ```

2. Bind an `HTTPRoute` to the `Gateway`.

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/{{ gwapi_version }}
    kind: HTTPRoute
    metadata:
      name: demo-example
    spec:
      parentRefs:

>       - name: example-gateway

Reviewer: Can we add a `curl` command that will verify that the connectivity is achieved?

Something like:

```
curl -i -v --cacert example.com-tls.crt -H "Host: demo.example.com" https://$PROXY_IP/echo
```

(I for some reason couldn't make this work but have verified that `curl -i -v -k -H "Host: demo.example.com" https://$PROXY_IP/echo` works. This will need to be verified so that the provided CA actually works)

Reviewer 2: Added instructions to both modes.

             service:
               name: echo
               port:
                 number: 1027
    ```

    The results will look like this:

    ```text
    ingress.networking.k8s.io/demo-example-com created
    ```
{% endnavtab %}
{% endnavtabs %}

#### Verification

You can run the verification by using `curl`:

```bash
  export PROXY_IP=$(kubectl get svc -n kong kong-gateway-proxy -o jsonpath={.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip})

>   curl  --cacert ./example.com-tls.crt -i -k -v -H"Host:demo.example.com"  https://{PROXY_IP}/echo

Reviewer 2: done.

> The Ingress API does not support TLS passthrough
{% endnavtab %}
{% endnavtabs %}

> #### Verification

Reviewer: Applied the suggestion in https://github.com/Kong/docs.konghq.com/pull/8598/commits/1832370078048add8e08c249e8826819cdb24894

> You need to let the domain `demo.example.com` resolving to the IP of the load balancer IP of {{ site.base_gateway }}'s proxy service by DNS or `/etc/hosts` file when verifying the connection. The IP can be fetched by: 
> 
> ```bash
> kubectl get svc -n kong kong-gateway-proxy -o jsonpath={.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip}
> ```
> 
> Then, you can verify that the TLS passthrough is configured correctly (for example, by `openssl`'s TLS client):
> 
> ```bash
>  openssl s_client -connect demo.example.com:8899

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To verify that the TLS passthrough is configured correctly (for example, by `openssl`'s TLS client) use the following commands:

```bash
export PROXY_IP=$(kubectl get svc -n kong kong-gateway-proxy -o jsonpath={.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip})
openssl s_client -connect ${PROXY_IP}:8899 -servername demo.example.com
```
